Whiplash is a 2014 American independent psychological drama film written and directed by Damien Chazelle, and starring Miles Teller, J. K. Simmons, Paul Reiser and Melissa Benoist. The film follows the ambitious music student and jazz drummer Andrew Neiman (Teller), who is pushed to his limit by his abusive instructor Terence Fletcher (Simmons) at the fictitious Shaffer Conservatory in New York City. The film was produced by Bold Films, Blumhouse Productions, and Right of Way Films. Sony Pictures acquired the worldwide distribution rights, releasing the film under its Sony Pictures Classics and Stage 6 Films banners for its North American and international releases respectively.[3]

The concept of Whiplash was conceived by Chazelle, who drew upon his experiences in a "very competitive" jazz band. Chazelle would complete the script of Whiplash in 2013. Soon after, Right of Way Films and Blumhouse Productions helped Chazelle turn 15 pages of the script into an 18-minute short film, also titled Whiplash. The short film received acclaim after debuting at the 2013 Sundance Film Festival, which attracted investors to produce the complete version of the script. Filming took place in September 2013 throughout Los Angeles in the course of 17 days. The film explores concepts of perfectionism, dedication, success, and deconstructs the concept of ambition.

Whiplash premiered in competition at the 2014 Sundance Film Festival on January 16, 2014, as the festival's opening film; it won the Audience Award and Grand Jury Prize for drama.[4] The film opened in limited release domestically in the United States and Canada on October 10, 2014, gradually expanding to over 500 screens and finally closing on March 26, 2015. The film received widespread critical acclaim for its screenplay, direction, film editing, sound mixing, and Teller's and Simmons' performances, and grossed $49 million on a $3.3 million budget, making it Chazelle's highest grossing feature until the release of La La Land (2016). The film received multiple awards and nominations, winning Academy Awards for Best Film Editing and Best Sound Mixing, and also being nominated for Best Picture and Best Adapted Screenplay. Simmons' portrayal of Fletcher won him the Academy, BAFTA, Critics' Choice, Golden Globe and Screen Actors Guild awards for Best Supporting Actor.

Andrew Neiman is a first-year student and jazz drummer at the prestigious Shaffer Conservatory in New York City, hoping to one day fulfill his childhood goals and leave a legacy like that of his idol Buddy Rich. He is recruited by Terence Fletcher, the conductor and bandleader of the Shaffer Conservatory Studio Band, to play in Fletcher's ensemble as an alternate for core drummer Carl Tanner. Andrew quickly discovers that Fletcher is relentlessly strict and ruthless to his students; he physically and verbally abuses Andrew after he fails to keep the tempo during the ensemble's rehearsal of Hank Levy's "Whiplash".

Determined to impress Fletcher, Andrew practices until his hands begin to bleed. In a jazz competition, after their first set, Andrew misplaces Carl's sheet music. When called for their second set, Carl insists that he can't play without his sheet music, but Andrew retorts that he can perform the second set from memory. After a successful performance, Fletcher promotes Andrew to the core drummer for the Studio Band. Fletcher also enlists Ryan Connolly, the core drummer from a lower-level ensemble within the conservatory.

As a result of his single-mindedness and Fletch's teaching, Andrew's relationship with his family begins to deteriorate. After Fletcher promotes Connolly to core drummer, Andrew continues practicing to his limit, breaking up with his girlfriend Nicole in order to focus solely on drumming. After a grueling five-hour practice session with Tanner and Connolly in which Fletcher repeatedly lashes out at them, Andrew eventually earns back the core position.

On the way to the next competition, the bus Andrew is riding breaks down. He rents a car but arrives late and realizes he left his sticks at the rental office. Fletcher berates Andrew, and tells him that he has 10 minutes to get his sticks. Andrew races back and retrieves them, but is unable to focus on driving and his car is hit by a truck on the way back. Severely injured, Andrew crawls from the wreckage and runs back to the theater, arriving just as the ensemble enters stage. He struggles to play "Caravan" due to his injuries, and Fletcher halts the performance to dismiss him. Enraged, Andrew attacks Fletcher on-stage, but is pulled away by security and expelled from Shaffer.

At his father's request, Andrew meets a lawyer representing the parents of Sean Casey, a former student of Fletcher, who committed suicide by hanging due to severe emotional distress caused by Fletcher's abuse. Casey's parents want Fletcher forbidden from teaching, and Andrew agrees to testify anonymously, leading Shaffer to terminate Fletcher.

Following his expulsion, Andrew abandons drumming and begins working in a restaurant. He visits a jazz club and encounters Fletcher playing piano. Fletcher claims his methods were solely intended to motivate promising students, referencing the story of how Charlie Parker rose to fame.

Fletcher invites Andrew to perform with Fletcher's band at the JVC Jazz Festival, assuring Andrew that the songs will be the same ones played by the Studio Band; Andrew hesitantly accepts. Andrew calls Nicole and invites her to the performance, apologizing for the way he ended their relationship. She is noncommittal, having started a new relationship. Andrew arrives at JVC and the band goes onstage. Just before they begin their first piece, Fletcher reveals that he knows Andrew testified against him and got Fletcher fired from his position. As revenge, Fletcher leads the band with a song Andrew does not know, for which Andrew has not been given the sheet music.

After attempting to perform, Andrew walks off stage humiliated, but returns and cuts off Fletcher's introduction to their next piece by playing "Caravan", cueing in the band himself. Initially angered, Fletcher resumes conducting. Andrew plays his part perfectly and Fletcher begins to enjoy the piece as it goes on. As the piece finishes Andrew continues playing into an extended solo. Fletcher nods in approval of Andrew's performance before cueing the band finale.